# Evictions-NYC
# Introduction

Evictions have been a hot topic, especially in New York City since they enacted the Tentant Safe Harbor Act to protect tenants who were unbale to pay their rent during Covid-19. For this reason, what this new law involves and how eviction occurrences have been fluctuating over the recent years for the city of New York will be investigated in the following. Tha dataset contains information about evicted properties, is called Evictions dataset and can be found in the Open Data NYC website. Analytically, it contains information about performed evictions from 2017 until now (May 12th 2023) such as their geographic location, the executing marshals who performed them while building information is also provided(i.e. commercial or residential property). For the analysis to be expanded and correlated with other factors that can play a vital role on explaining why and where evictions are taking place, 5-year-estimates from the American Community Survey (ACS) that contain housing, economic, social and demographic data will supplement our analysis.


# First plot about covid.

At first glance, anyone can detect that there has been a significant drop in evictions from 2020 onwards. This is related to a law that was enacted on March 7th helping to protect tenants that suffer financial hardship due to Covid-19. Tenants have to affirm in court that they have financial issues caused by the pandemic in order to stop the landlord from evicting them. This law was valid until the 15th of Janunary 2022 which is strongly noticeable in the distribution of figure 1. What is interesting is that there is still a rather low amount of evictions in 2022.

Maybe we can get inspiration here? https://council.nyc.gov/data/evictions/

# Second Plot for Boroughs with most evictions, hotspots, (ratio with units, population), Map with years plus hotspots


The two main aspects that the research is focusing and trying to give a clear interpretation about, is firstly: which are the "hotspot" areas in the city and what is the justification behind that trend and secondly: what is the reason behind why the eviction rates are starting to drop even from 2017 onwards.

As far as the later is concerned, additional information should be retrieved in order to better justify this "trend". In this regard, housing data together with economic data are merged, only to depict the mean household income and how it is distributed over the years. After this inspection, it was founded that household income increases in this period, answering to some extent the reason why evictions have dropped. Adding up to this, one would be interested in viualizing the rent prices over the years. As such, the corresponding information was calculated and plotted, showing that rent prices are also following an upward "trend". This information though, contradicts the main findings that evictions are decreasing. At this point, it is necessary to provide more solid information on the economic state of New York in these years in order to explain eviction incidents. Thus, it was decided to delve into the unmployment rates on those years. After isolating the civilian labor force out of the total population from the supplementary economic dataset, the unemployment rates over the the years were showed. The results reveal that unemployment is decreasing from 2017 to 2019 and then it goes up again following the COVID-19 pandemic. Taking the above into consideration, it can now become more clear, at least to a certain extent,why there is a fall in evictions.

The second aspect of this analysis is to search for "hotspot" areas through the city and analyze them further. As such, first thing is to categorize New York into boroughs and NTAs(neighborhood tabulation areas). New York city is divided into 5 boroughs, namely Manhattan, Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn and Staten island. After retrieving the relevant information, the corresponding ratio of occurrences of evictions compared to the population of each borough is plotted and investigated further. Although Bronx is 4th in rank in terms of population, it is standing out as the borough with the highest ratio of evictions in the examined years. For all the other four boroughs, the numbers are proportional. In particular, Brooklyn and Queens are the highest populated boroughs and come 2nd and 3rd in ranking of evictions, while Manhattan and Staten Island are the least populated boroughs but with the less recorded evictions too. In this regard, it is interesting to look upon Bronx and its characteristics as a borough. A relatively important information that can help us better interpret the augmented evictions in Bronx, is to search for and visualize the corresponding industries of each borough. The values are normalized based on the total civilian labor force that each borough has and thus, comparisons among the boroughs can objectively be performed. From the plot, someone can immediately point out that Educational services (healthcare, social) is by far the industry in which the majority of the population works and Bronx is once again the district with the highest values. However, scientific and management industry (both fields in which the average salary is escalated compared to other fields) has the lowest values in the Bronx borough. Furthermore, the finance and insurance sector, also takes its lowest value in Bronx, leading up to an overall estimate that Bronx is a Borough with "less" money compared to the other ones. In contrast, we can see that the fincance sector is dominating in Manhattan, something which does not come as a surprise since the financial district lies there. However, it confirms once more why the evictions are not in high degree in Manhattan.


Another interesting information that could enhance our research about the boroughs and their corresponding eviction rates, is to find out about the percentages of ethnicity groups that reside in each borough. Thus, a first plot of the ethnicity groups in the city of New York had to be schemed. It appears like the city is mostly comprised of Caucasians, followed by Hispanic-Latino and then from African-Americans. Asian is the 4th ethnicity group in percentage while all the other ethnicities appear in a much lower extent.  The findings of the plotted distribution of all the ethnicity groups in all boroughs reveals some intriguing facts. In particular,  for Bronx, which is of immerse interest, Latinos and African Americans appear to be the majority while Caucasians are the minority of the Borough. Furthermore, Queens has a very high number of Asian people compared to other ethnicities in the borough while Staten Island which has the least evictions is mainly inhabited by Caucasians. Manhattan, which is relatively low in the rank of eviction occurrences, is also inhabited mainly by Caucasians. 

Having the above in mind, it can be referred that the distribution of different professions among the boroughs can explain, at least to some extent, why evictions might be higher in Bronx compared to other districts. The information retrieved from the ethnicity groups residing in each district cannot provide us with an explanation or justification about eviction rates but it can display some interesting facts that could be relevant for another research topic. For example, based on the above findings, someone could enhance his/her knowledge on how the wealth is distributed among ethnicity groups in New York city, which are the main professions of each group and why does it happen that Hispanic-Latino and African Americans are working in lower-salary industries.







Link to the [website](https://franziskamarie.github.io/posts/evictions-NYC)
